# Projecting oceanic connectivity in the changing Arctic, with applications to Marine Protected Area design

## Thesis idea:
The trajectory of particles in the ocean can be modeled using Lagrangian ocean analysis. This approach estimates the trajectory using velocity fields from OGCMs to integrate the local velocity of virtual particles. By dividing the ocean into grid cells, releasing an ensemble of virtual particle in each cell and determining the position of each particle after a timestep *dt*, a stochastic matrix can be created, indicating the probability that in one timestep a particle moves from one grid cell to another. This provides a measure of connectivity between distinct grid cells. By using tools from network theory, we can find *oceanic provinces*: groups of cells that are well connected with one another, but exchange fewer particles with other cells. This is done by first constructing a weighted network with grid cells as nodes and edges being weighted according to the particle transition probability (dependent on *dt*) from the stochastic matrix, which thus serves as the adjacency matrix of the network. Then, tools like graph partitioning or community detection are applied to identify internally well-connected regions and the boundaries between them.
One of the possible applications of identifying oceanic provinces is the design of marine protected areas (MPAs). The connectivity of MPAs is important for a population’s genetics, persistence and distribution. Identifying oceanic provinces in which grid cells are internally well-connected can thus contribute to the future design of MPAs.
The demarcation of oceanic provinces depends on the time scale dt as well as the evolution of the underlying flow field. Flow in the Arctic experiences yearly variation due to the seasonal cycle and is projected to change substantially in the coming decades due to the trend of declining sea ice extent.
In my research project, I want to investigate the impact of changing flow in the arctic on the topology of oceanic provinces. I aim to create an understanding of the different physical processes at play and how they map to changes in this topology. This can be applied to MPA design by identifying areas that are suitable for MPA allocation while sustaining their function over long timespans in the changing Arctic.
